[DX-955] Add use-case based SDK references across Pub/Sub pages (#3340)
ably/docs: src/pages/docs/presence-occupancy/presence.mdx

  - /docs/core-features/versions/v1.1/presence
---

Presence enables clients to be aware of other clients that are currently "present" on a channel. Each member present on a channel has a unique self-assigned client identifier and system-assigned connection identifier, along with an optional payload that can be used to describe the member's status or attributes. Presence enables you to quickly build apps such as [chat rooms](/docs/chat) and multiplayer games by automatically keeping track of who is present in real time across any device.

<Aside data-type='note'>

> For building chat applications, use the [Chat SDK](/docs/chat), which provides purpose-built APIs for rooms, messages, typing indicators, and reactions. For collaborative features like avatar stacks and live cursors, use the [Spaces SDK](/docs/spaces). Both SDKs build on presence. See [product guidance](/docs/platform/products) for a full comparison.

Reviewer: Same here as above. Different use case and remove.

Author: updated

> For building chat applications, use the [Chat SDK](/docs/chat) which provides purpose-built APIs for rooms, messages, typing indicators, and reactions. For collaborative features like avatar stacks and live cursors, use the [Spaces SDK](/docs/spaces). Presence is the underlying primitive these SDKs build upon. See [product guidance](/docs/platform/products) for a full comparison.

Reviewer 2: Missing comma before non-restrictive `which`. Also `the underlying primitive these SDKs build upon` is wordier than needed.

```suggestion
For building chat applications, use the [Chat SDK](/docs/chat), which provides purpose-built APIs for rooms, messages, typing indicators, and reactions. For collaborative features like avatar stacks and live cursors, use the [Spaces SDK](/docs/spaces). Both SDKs build on presence. See [product guidance](/docs/platform/products) for a full comparison.
```

Author: Keeping the original wording. "Presence is the underlying primitive these SDKs build upon" conveys the architectural relationship explicitly — readers understand Chat/Spaces are layered on top of presence. "Both SDKs build on presence" is shorter but loses that framing.

|-------|-------------|
| Enter | A new member has entered the channel |
| Leave | A member who was present has now left the channel. This may be a result of an explicit request to leave or implicitly when detaching from the channel. Alternatively, if a member's connection is abruptly disconnected and they do not resume their connection within a minute, Ably treats this as a leave event as the client is no longer present |

> | Update | An already present member has updated their [member data](#member-data). Being notified of member data updates can be useful, for example, it can be used to update the status of a user when they are typing a message (see also [Chat typing indicators](/docs/chat/rooms/typing) for a purpose-built solution) |

Reviewer: I don't think this should be shoe-horned here. This isn't immediately relatable to presence IMO.

Each unique [`clientId`](/docs/api/realtime-sdk#client-id) may only be present once when entering on behalf of another client as the unique identifier for each member in a presence set is the combined [`clientId`](/docs/api/realtime-sdk#client-id) and shared [`connectionId`](/docs/api/realtime-sdk/connection#id).

> A single [`clientId`](/docs/api/realtime-sdk#client-id) may be present multiple times on the same channel via different client connections. Ably considers these as different members of the presence set for the channel, however they will be differentiated by their unique connectionId. For example, if a client with ID “Sarah” is connected to a [chat](/docs/chat) channel on both a desktop and a mobile device simultaneously, “Sarah” will be present twice in the presence member set with the same client ID, yet will have two unique connection IDs. A member of the presence set is therefore unique by the combination of the clientId and connectionId strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single [`clientId`](/docs/api/realtime-sdk#client-id) may be present multiple times on the same channel via different client connections. Ably considers these as different members of the presence set for the channel, however they will be differentiated by their unique connectionId. For example, if a client with ID “Sarah” is connected to a channel on both a desktop and a mobile device simultaneously, “Sarah” will be present twice in the presence member set with the same client ID, yet will have two unique connection IDs. A member of the presence set is therefore unique by the combination of the clientId and connectionId strings.
```

<Code>
```json
{
  "my-presence-channel": ["presence"],
  "my-channel": ["publish", "history", "subscribe"],

> }

Author: Fixed — removed the trailing comma so the JSON is valid for copy/paste.

<Code>
```json
{
  "my-presence-channel": ["presence", "subscribe"],
  "my-channel": ["publish", "history", "subscribe"]
}
```
</Code>

> A second approach is to split capabilities across two tokens for the same channel. A publisher-role token grants only `publish` and `presence`. Clients using it enter the presence set and publish messages but receive nothing back, since they lack `subscribe`. A subscriber-role token grants `subscribe` (and `history` if needed) so other clients can read the channel.

Reviewer: Not sure why we've changed this example here?

Publisher token:

<Code>
```json
{
  "my-channel": ["publish", "presence"]
}
```
</Code>

Subscriber token:

<Code>
```json
{
  "my-channel": ["history", "subscribe"]
}
```
</Code>

> The `subscribe` capability covers both regular messages and presence state-change messages, so it cannot be used to receive one without the other. Use [channel mode flags](/docs/channels/options#modes) when a client must subscribe to regular messages and remain present without receiving presence events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `subscribe` capability covers both regular messages and presence messages, so it cannot be used to receive one without the other. Use [channel mode flags](/docs/channels/options#modes) when a client must subscribe to regular messages and remain present without receiving presence events.
```

<Code>
```json
{
  "my-presence-channel": ["presence", "subscribe"],
  "my-channel": ["publish", "history", "subscribe"]
}
```
</Code>

> A second approach is to split capabilities across two tokens for the same channel. A publisher-role token grants only `publish` and `presence`, so clients using it can enter the presence set and publish messages, but receive nothing back because they lack `subscribe`. A subscriber-role token grants `subscribe` (and `history` if needed) so other clients can read the channel.

Reviewer 2: Second sentence runs ~30 words. Style guide caps at 25. Split:

```suggestion
A second approach is to split capabilities across two tokens for the same channel. A publisher-role token grants only `publish` and `presence`. Clients using it enter the presence set and publish messages but receive nothing back, since they lack `subscribe`. A subscriber-role token grants `subscribe` (and `history` if needed) so other clients can read the channel.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/ably/docs/pull/3340/commits/1a27dd4c14df6ad2f23a2ba07baaeb1b99a79004

Publisher token:

<Code>
```json
{
  "my-channel": ["publish", "presence"]
}
```
</Code>

Subscriber token:

<Code>
```json
{
  "my-channel": ["history", "subscribe"]
}
```
</Code>

> The `subscribe` capability covers both regular messages and presence state-change messages, so it cannot be used to receive one without the other. To let a single client subscribe to regular messages on a channel while still being present without receiving presence events, use [channel mode flags](/docs/channels/options#modes) instead.

Reviewer 2: Second sentence is 30 words and front-loads the qualifiers. Lead with the action:

```suggestion
The `subscribe` capability covers both regular messages and presence state-change messages, so it cannot be used to receive one without the other. Use [channel mode flags](/docs/channels/options#modes) when a client must subscribe to regular messages and remain present without receiving presence events.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/ably/docs/pull/3340/commits/1a27dd4c14df6ad2f23a2ba07baaeb1b99a79004

<Code>
```json
{
  "my-presence-channel": ["presence", "subscribe"],
  "my-channel": ["publish", "history", "subscribe"],

> }

Author: Fixed — trailing comma removed here as well.

```json
{
  "presenceChannel": ["publish", "presence"],
  "my-channel": ["presence", "history", "subscribe"]

> }

Author: https://github.com/ably/docs/pull/3340/commits/531980e1f1c2c4f979e6c42c50494619e4ff25a1
